Family Financial Scoring Model

    This project analyzes family financial data, creates a scoring model to evaluate financial health, and visualizes key insights such as spending patterns and financial scores. The project is a Data Science Internship assignment, which includes the following key deliverables:

1. Data analysis and exploration
2. Financial scoring model (0-100)
3. Visualizations of financial metrics and scores

Requirements:
To run the analysis and visualizations in this project, you will need the following Python libraries:

pandas
numpy
matplotlib
seaborn

You can install the required libraries using the following command:

pip install -r requirements.txt


Project Structure
The project is organized into the following files:

1. app.ipynb: Jupyter Notebook that contains the analysis, financial scoring model, and visualizations.
2. requirements.txt: List of Python dependencies.

Steps to Run the Project
a) Install Dependencies: First, make sure to install all required libraries by running:
pip install -r requirements.txt

b) Run the Jupyter Notebook: Open the notebook app.ipynb in Jupyter or any compatible environment (such as Google Colab). The notebook will walk you through:

1. Loading and exploring the dataset
2. Performing data aggregation and analysis
3. Building and evaluating the financial scoring model
4. Visualizing key insights

c) Data: The project assumes that the financial data is provided in an Excel file (family_financial_and_transactions_data.xlsx). The dataset contains family financial data such as income, expenses, savings, loan payments, and more.

Make sure to place the Excel file at the specified location or adjust the path in the notebook.


Key Features of the Analysis
a) Data Analysis:

Identifying spending patterns at the family and member levels.
Correlations between financial metrics such as income vs. savings, and income vs. expenses.

b) Financial Scoring Model:

 A scoring model (range: 0–100) is created based on the following factors:
1. Savings-to-Income Ratio
2. Monthly Expenses as a Percentage of Income
3. Loan Payments as a Percentage of Income
4. Credit Card Spending Trends
5. Achievement of Financial Goals
6. Spending habits in categories like Travel and Entertainment


c) Visualizations:

1. Spending distribution across categories
2. Family-wise financial scores
3. Member-wise spending trends


d) Correlation Heatmap:

Visualize correlations between key financial metrics.


Pending Tasks
The deployment of the financial scoring model as a Flask or FastAPI API is pending and was not completed in this submission.

Running the Notebook
To run the Jupyter Notebook:

1. Navigate to the project directory.

2. Open Jupyter Notebook:
   jupyter notebook app.ipynb

3. Follow the steps in the notebook to perform data analysis and generate visualizations.



Conclusion
The notebook includes a complete analysis of the financial data, a scoring model to assess financial health, and various visualizations to highlight spending patterns and trends. The only missing component is the deployment of the model as a web API.